Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Lobs. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Robert Welton. He is professor in
the philosophy department at the University of Colorado. Colorado
Springs. His areas of special specialization are philos of
mind, philosophy of neuroscience, and the work of Friedrich
Nietzsche. And today we're talking about his latest book,
Nietzsche's on the Genealogy of Morality, a guide. So
Dr Welton, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure
to everyone.
Thank you so much for Cara, for having me
on.
So before we get into some of the specific
content of the book, I mean, I've already had
a ton of conversations on the show about Nietzsche
and his philosophy in many, many different aspects of
his philosophy. But today, we're focusing on a specific
book of his, on the genealogy of morality. What
goals did you have in mind with this sort
of guide to his book?
Well, as the title of the book suggests, it's
a, it's a mo modest set of goals. Um
I wanted to steer readers of the genealogy through
all of it and then to expand on some
of its most important and it's intricate and so,
and even the perplexing facets of the book, I
also wanted to introduce uh readers to a number
of the insights that have been developed uh by
other Nietzsche scholars in the last 40 or 50
years. But more than that, um and fundamentally, I
wanted readers to come away from reading the book
uh wanting to read more Nietzsche uh because I
think Nietzsche is one of the great philosophers and
uh somebody whose writings uh bear readings and rereading
uh for many years.
Mhm. And where would you place on the genealogy
of morality within Nietzsche's literary corpus? I mean, when
exactly did he write it? And how do you
look at how it relates to some of his
previous works and the works that came after,
you know, I think of Nietzsche's uh career as
um distinguishable into a couple of different phases. There's
the early phase when he was still a professor
at the University of Basel. And then for various
reasons, most of them related to his poor health.
He resigned from his position at Basel in 1877
or 1870 maybe 1878. And that left him uh
without teaching responsibilities and he really began his philosophical
development at that point. Um The books that came
out immediately upon his resignation were uh human, all
too human and daybreak. And then he produced the
first four books of uh the gay science, also
known as Joyful inquiry. And then he wrote Zarathustra
over the course of three years and returning from
Zarathustra, he wrote Beyond Good and Evil, which was
published in 1886. During the winter of 1886 1887
he was immensely productive and he produced revised editions
of the books that he'd already published. He wrote
new prefaces and Fords for them. And in the
case of uh the Joyful Inquiry, he wrote an
entire new book for that publication. That book. The
fifth book is one of the clearest statements of
uh Nietzsche's mature philosophy. But having completed these new
prefaces and forwards and the fifth book of uh
Joyful Inquiry, he started to get serious about what
had been for him percolating for at least two
years. Um This magnum opus was his great project.
It was supposed to be called The Will To
Power. He later changed the title to re Evaluation
of all values. He had started sketching it out
in 1885. But in the spring of 1887 he
started to commit himself almost full time for the
project. And then in a three week burst in
July while he was summering at Sils Maria in
Austria. He wrote virtually all of what he considered
to be a preparatory study for the magnum opus
re rev revaluation of all values. And that was
on the genealogy of morality. It was published in
1887 later that year in November he then traveled
to Turin in the late spring of 1888 to
continue work on his revaluation of values project. His
health was good at this point. And while he
was in Turin, he was very productive, he was
pretty annoyed with what was happening in Germany at
the point at this point in time. And he
was fearful that the death of, uh, Friedrich, the
third's, uh, Friedrich, the third would lead to hostilities
um that were even more deadly than the frank
oppression war. So he diverted himself uh during his
last summer in Sils Maria with a statement on
Wagner and that was published in September of 1888.
As the case of Wagner, he then returned to
turn from Sils Maria and he was determined to
get going and complete the revaluation of values project.
He shaped some of the already written material from
that project into two shorter manuscripts. Twilight of the
idols and the anti-christ. And those were published after
he went mad. Uh The twilight of the idols
was published in 1889 and anti-christ was published in
1894. And then he collapsed over the Christmas holidays
of 1888 1889. Uh The famous stories about this
are we well documented and he never did any
more productive work in some ways. Then on the
genealogy of moral morality is a continuation of uh
his prelude to a future philosophy that he announced.
And beyond good and evil. And it's a kind
of first installment in that future of philosophy. He
recognized that it wasn't the revaluation of values itself.
It was a preparatory study for that. But um
it was important for him to get it out
of the way.
So let me ask you then before we get
into the specific content of his book, this evaluation
project, what does it mean exactly? What does it
mean to evaluate all values for Nietzsche?
Be Nietzsche? Um The genealogy of morality is a
kind of modest book. It presents a description of
how our moral evaluative practices have developed over the
past 3000 years or so, but it doesn't critique
those practices. That's kind of a a misdirection. He
actually does engage in some critique even in genealogy
morality, but he announces that it is a description,
a history, a psychosocial history of how we came
to believe the moral things that we believe and
how we came to have the moral evaluative practices
that we have. And in so far as that's
the case, it's only the first part of the
evaluation part. The other part of the evaluation project
is to criticize, to critique moral evaluative practices. And
this part is far more significant than anything that's
offered in genealogy of morality. But because he collapsed
and never came back, he never finished the cri
the c the really critical part of moral evaluative
practices. This idea about criticizing moral evaluative practices goes
back a long way in his, in his work,
even while he was writing human and all too
human and da and Daybreak, he was already interested
in something larger than the origin of the value
of un egoistic moral values as he inherited those
kinds of un egoistic moral values from Schopenhauer. Um
He understood that the origins of morality had to
be understood in order to criticize whether they had
any value or not. And he started that project
in Daybreak inhuman Hum. Hum Beyond good and evil,
gay uh gay science, genealogy morality. He thought that
all kinds of studies were going to help to
reveal the many facets of morality and would have
to contribute to our better knowledge of its value.
And so in genealogy morality, for example, he suggests
that all of the sciences have to prepare the
way for the future work of the philosopher where
the future work of the philosopher is solving the
problem of values and ha having to decide on
the rank order of values. Now, I'd also say
that the critique is uh a much more interesting
endeavor than providing the history of moral valuation. It
was the goal of his revaluation book and he
never really uh got off the ground with that
part of the project very quick. Uh Very far
having said that and having acknowledged that genealogy morality
is really kind of a preliminary set of studies.
Um We have to accept that Nietzsche readily has
in mind, a set of results from the critical
part as he engages in the historical analysis of
moral moral values in genealogy, because the standard um
against which the value of all moral values and,
and ideals have to be measured is whether they
promote or hinder human flourishing. That is whether they're
symptoms of psychological and cultural sickness, decadence, nihilism or
whether they're symptoms of psychological and cultural flourishing health
in anti decadence.
Mhm. But the book is titled on the Genealogy
of Morality. What does genealogy mean in this particular
context? What is the genealogical method? Exactly?
Well, as I've already suggested, it has two components.
Uh The first is to describe how, in fact,
we came to hold our beliefs and judgments about
good and evil, good and bad and to identify
the mechanisms for enforcing those beliefs and those mechanisms
are, are really quite diverse. The second part is
to critically analyze the value that moral values have.
These two facets together comprise uh the revaluation project.
Most of genealogy is devoted to the first task,
but it has to be admitted, I think to
anybody who's read the genealogy that towards the end
of each of the essays, his descriptions, Nietzsche's descriptions
of the mechanisms by which we came to believe
our moral beliefs and by which those moral beliefs
are enforced, his descriptions become laden with evaluative judgments
about the topics he's describing. So the entirety of
genealogy lies within the scope of the evaluative context
fixed by the second task, which is the critique
of moral values whose development is described in genealogy.
I think we can also say that uh genealogy
is an instance of a recognizable kind of intellectual
project. It presents historical psychological philological, anthropological and philosophical
evidence about the origins of our moral beliefs, our
moral evaluative practices and our moral values themselves. And
given that morality has historically been understood as a
branch of intellectual inquiry that lays down the principles
of how we ought to live. Uh The gravity
of the project is pretty clear.
So addressing another topic, when it comes to the
methodology that he applies in the book, this is
something that I've already talked about on the show
with some other Nietzsche scholars. But he, he has
a sort of commitment to philosophical naturalism, right? So
what does naturalism mean in this context? I I
need to ask you that because nowadays in the
sort of intellectual slash cultural environment that is more
dominant in our society, we tend to associate naturalism
with science, the sciences, the scientific method or methods
and not so much with philosophy. So in the
context of Nietzsche's philosophical approach, what does naturalism entail?
I'd say it entails at least the following. It
also entails, I think much more. I think first
naturalism is a view about what exists, mm It's
an ontological claim. Reality is exhausted by what exists
in nature. But that begs the question, what's nature
and the term nature refers, I think in Nietzsche
to the set of every causally efficacious phenomena, the
set of all causally efficacious phenomena, whether those phenomena
be objects or properties or processes or states or
events or systems structures, whatever they are so long
as they're found in the spatial temporal world. And
so long as they're studied by the natural sciences,
the life sciences, the social Sciences, the Formal sciences.
Um And so long as it also includes uh
creative products of culture, these are objects are phenomenal
within the domain of a naturalistic philosophy. Second, I
think naturalism is also a view about what we
can know. It's the epistemological claim that we can
have knowledge only of what exists in nature in
this rich complicated way that I've just tried to
unpack above. And third, I think that naturalism is
a view about how we acquire knowledge. So it
can also be a kind of methodological claim that
the cognitive tools, the procedures and the routines by
which we gain our knowledge are continuous in some
sense between philosophy and empirical science. So that's a
kind of basic understanding of uh naturalism in nature.
I think this is consistent with some of the
uh proposals for naturalism that other Nietzsche scholars have
made. Uh And this would include people like Ricardi
and uh Katsas Katzif Fanis and lighter and so
forth. So I think it's consistent with their views
I'm also impressed by uh Richard Shack's idea that
naturalism has to be more than this because naturalism
can be understood to be kind of a reductionist
point of view. And for Shaq Nietzsche's naturalism is
not reductive for Shat uh Nietzsche's naturalism also has
to include the unusual facet of human beings that
we are no longer merely animal. We are a
deeply cultural and cultured species. And so uh a
a more robust form of naturalism cannot be in
Shaq's terms, scientic cannot privileged science over all other
kinds of in inquiry into how we are the
way we are or what we can do. We
are a strange species and this picks up on
all of those facets of Nietzsche's work that emphasizes
just how peculiar we really are. Nietzsche calls us
the sickly species. He calls us the most uncanny
species. We, he calls us the most fragile species.
And that's because our way of life, although it
is grounded in our natural and animal existence is
much more than that as well. And what is
more than that has emerged from but can no
longer be reduced to these animal needs. And so
a naturalism for shacked has to take these additional
facets into account. And that entails that we no
longer think that um naturalism is simply a view
that favors science above everything else. We must also
recognize the important contributions of the visual arts, the
musical arts, the literary arts, and all of the
other creative activity that we engage in. And we
must also accept that we are a highly technological
species. We surround ourselves with do Gws and fast
and uh and gadgets and Nietzsche is interested in
that as well. But what follows from even the
basic view of naturalism is that there can't be
any causally efficacious non spatial temporal objects. There can't
be things that exist outside of space and time.
So there are no transcendent objects. And since knowledge
is exhausted by what we know of what exists
in nature, there can't be any knowledge of non
spatial temporal objects or properties either. And since philosophy
and the empirical sciences work together uh to develop
knowledge of the natural world by using their various
distinctive methods, there can't be any means of gaining
knowledge of nature that transcends the methods. And so
the philos so philosophy's long insistence that there is
a real world beyond the world of perception immediately
falls the ground. The claim that there is anything
beyond what is given in sensory perception and our
experience, our p our empirical experience has to go
by the boards that is kind of the basis
for his rejection of all of the transcendental nonsense
that philosophers have um taken themselves to be spokespersons
for.
So with that uh last bit in mind, let
me ask you then in undertaking this project, this
project about re evaluating or evaluating all moral values
in on the genealogy of morality. Um IN what
ways would Nietzsche criticize prior philosophers, theologians and religious
advocates. When it came to their approach to moral
psychology?
There is too much to say as a response
to your question, then I can possibly do justice
to. In this interview. I will say the following.
If you look at his criticisms of philosophical theological
and religious moral psychology, you can categorize his criticisms
using a conceptual scheme that he introduces himself in
twilight of the idols. Twilight of the idols is
one of the very last manuscripts that he prepared
for uh prepared for before collapsing, prepared for publication.
And in this, he distills his philosophical thinking into
a series of very short aphorisms. And one of
them is sets of a versions. And one of
these is his summary statement of four errors that
are common to all philosophers and theologians and religious
advocates. And these are errors that are the basis
for many of his criticisms of theological and religious
and philosophical moral psychology. The first one is to
confuse cause and consequence. When philosophers and religious advocates
confuse cause and consequence, they identify some event or
state as causing another Avenger state. But in fact,
the latter causes the former. He thinks that this
mistake is rampant in religion and religious psychology, moral
psychology. They argue for example, that virtue has happiness
as its consequence. But Nietzsche's counter is that happiness
has virtue as its consequence. And he thinks that
this what we, he, he thinks that this uh
reversal of causation is characteristic of the topsy turvy,
moral psychology that you find in religion and theology
and philosophy. The second error that he identifies is
that philosophers and religious advocates routinely posit false causes.
They identify some event or state as causing another
advent or state when in fact, the former doesn't
cause the latter at all. And so when we
think about this one, this one is particularly pernicious
and is particularly widespread. He I quickly identifies three
false causes, willing conscious thoughts and the subject, the
i the unified philosophical subject. These are all constituent
elements of philosophical and theological, moral psychology. And Nietzsche
thinks that all three of them simply are non
existent. We think that the subject of conscious thought,
the philosophical subject I causes our thoughts. We think
that conscious thoughts cause acts of a willing faculty
and we think that acts of a willing faculty
cause various events inside and outside of us. But
all three of them are fictions. According to Nietzsche.
The third error that philosophers and theologians make is
introducing imaginary causes. They identify some event or state
that causes another event or state when in fact
the identified uh event or state is completely fictional.
And here, Nietzsche has a kind of general thought
in mind. I think we are experts at manufacturing
expla uh explanations and theologians and philosophers um are
no different. We think we're all prone to a
very familiar pattern of thinking. We experience something unexpected,
something new and we wanna know what caused it.
And so to relieve the cognitive dissonance, the cognitive
confusion and the psychological anxiety that attends our ignorance.
We try to explain the phenomenon by fitting it
into an already existing but usually crude web of
beliefs and knowledge. And he says in this section
of twilight that we're not particularly uh fussy about
easing our, So our anxiety, as long as we
ease our anxiety and cognitive distance, that will be
satisfactory. And so we usually latch on to the
very first idea uh that comes to us, but
given our own background, that will be that we
will rely on what is familiar to us. So
as he points out in the twilight, when the
bankers um confronted with something new, he immediately thinks
of business and the Christian thinks of sin, these
kinds of explanations while they're uh sometimes serviceable for
easing dissonance and confusion, ignore the fact that what
we're most familiar with and what we find most
plausible are really good measures for fixing the actual
causes of the phenomenon. And so that's the third
error. And then the final error is um he
uh he, he notes that free will in particular,
is a uh separable and specific kind of error.
Philosophers and religious advocates try to routinely act uh
identify acts as being produced by free will as
an inventor or state that's freely chosen by a
subject but free will is a fiction and cannot
freely choose any act at all. So that's the
fourth error. These four errors I think lie at
the lie in the background of his criticisms of
theological, philosophical and religious moral psychology. There are theoretical
objections and he fills in that theoretical uh that
that conceptual framework with a lot of detail throughout
genealogy of morality.
So in the book, there are three big essays
and the first one you identify as being about
the impact of Rehema on Christian moral evaluation. So
my first question about that would be why is
it that apparently Nietzsche sets out to tackle the
genealogy of morality but then shifts to Christianity.
Um The answer here is pretty straightforward morality and
Christianity overlap so much for nature that any analysis
of the origins and the development of one of
them has to also be an analysis of the
origins and development of the other of them. So
when we look into the history, psychology, etymology of
the use of the language in our talk about
good and evil, which is of course, the genealogy
of morality to which we all as Europeans adhere.
He thinks we must also at the same time
investigate the history, psychology and etymology of the language
they use in Christianity, which is the dominant European
religion. So there is no way to understand the
origins and development of our moral practices, our moral
value to practices without understanding the origins and development
of Christianity in particular, but religion in general.
So in his view, it is from Christianity, at
least particularly in Europe that uh terms like good,
bad and evil stem from, right.
I would say no, that's not where they stem
from. They have a prehistory to the their history
within Christianity, within the judeo-christian um religious um uh
tradition. Here we engage Nietzsche's philological past. He thinks
that he has discovered what he calls a conceptual
transformation in the ways that terms that were originally
used by a class of individuals. He calls the
masters to describe their social, their economic and their
political superiority came to characterize what's noble. He thinks
that there's a similar conceptual transformation that governs how
descriptive terms that were once reviewed, re reserved for
the lower classes, the rabble, the herd, parallel descriptive
terms for what is being base and vulgar in
an individual. This conceptual transformation, three dates. Uh THE
emergence of Christianity and emergence, the the emergence of
Christianity takes these terms that were already in use
on board as it developed as a religious and
as a moral and a philosophical tradition. So, um
I'm I'm sure that your listeners are familiar with
the idea that Nietzsche's makes a distinction between the
difference between good and bad on the one hand,
and good and evil on the other hand, but
he broadens it well beyond German and other European
languages and traces these roots back to Sanskrit and
Ancient Greek and Latin. So, for example, he talks
about the term from Sanskrit uh called AA, which
comes from, you know, about 1000 before the common
era or 1000 years before the common era. It
refers to wealthy ownership and the wellborn classes and
to the character trait of being noble and privileged.
Now, this term is of course the root of
Aryan, aryan. But it's also a term that served
as a self designated anonym for people living then.
And what is now Northwestern India, Pakistan, Afghanistan and
Iran. In fact, it's the basis of the term
Iran and Iranian. So it's not just that there
is German uh etymological evidence about good and bad
and good and evil. It is a common feature
of ancient languages and so on the basis of
this, Nietzsche draws a a generalization in all these
ancient languages. The primordial evaluative terms were self reflexive
designations by members of a master class of aristocrats
and warriors. And those self reflexive designations subsequently underwent
a conceptual transformation to become self reflective descriptions of
their individual character traits. So they simply started by
identifying themselves as the good as the privileged and
then they unpacked that later in this conceptual transformation
by identifying the individual character traits they had in
virtue of which they were good. Now, we have
to remember that the highest cla cast in an
ancient society was not always the nightly aristocratic caste
it probably was the norm. But in some ancient
societies, priests, aristocrats and warriors coexisted uh side by
side. In some, they continuously fought with one another.
And in some the priests, the clergy held the
highest cast, whatever their relations to the warriors and
aristocrats may have been like the clergy. However, was
always different in crucial ways. The nightly aristocratic mode
of evaluations painfully simple and based on nothing more
sophisticated than pronouncing that they were good. And then
as an afterthought, they decreed that the rabble the
herd were base, they were bad, the clergy, although
they were also members of the nobility emphasize something
different. They emphasized purity and cleanliness. And so their
contrast was between the pure and the clean on
the one hand and the impure and dirty. On
the other hand. Now, in the old master slave
societies, the distinction between good and bad and between
pure and impure was incredibly crude. Uh Nietzsche says
at one point in genealogy that it was coarse,
superficial, narrow and un symbolic to a degree that
we can scarcely imagine. For example, the term pure
originally referred only to those sanitary few who wash
themselves regularly, who refrain from eating certain kinds of
food and who who refrained from engaging in sex
with commoners? That's how direct and un symbolic purity
really was.
So, could you tell us now about the phenomenon
of Reema? Where is it? And does it play
a role in the slave revolt in morality.
It does. Um If I may, I'm gonna prepare
to answer your question by stepping back and unpacking
a little bit about what master slave Miraval actually
looks like. And then start talking about Raison Tal.
Mhm. The great contrast between the masters and the
slaves is a historical con contrast. The masters had
certain socio-economic properties, they had certain physiological properties, they
had certain psychological properties and those properties. The socio-economic
ones, the physiological ones and the psychological ones were
contrasted with the same kind of socio-economic properties, physiological
properties and psychological properties of the slaves. So in
the book, um I identify a set of these
properties and their contrasts. If you think about the
socio-economic dimensions, the masses were aristocratic and noble. The
slaves were lower class, they were heard they were
commoners. The masters were typically knightly and warriors and
the slaves were pacifists. The masters were wealthy, they
were prosperous. They were well born, the slaves were
poor, they were unfortunate. They were ill born, the
masses were privileged, the slaves were deprived, they were
beasts of burden. The masters dominated and oppressed others.
The slaves were oppressed and were ill treated by
the masters. The masters were superior. The slaves were
mediocre physiologically, the masters were healthy. The slaves were
sick and diseased. The masters were energetic and vital.
The slaves were weary, exhausted and lethargic. The master
were powerful and potent. The slaves were powerless and
impotent. The masters were active. The slaves were reactive
psychologically, the masters were happy, the slaves were unhappy.
The masters were creative. The slaves were reactive. The
master said yes to things and life. The slave
said no to things and life. The masters were
adventurous. The slaves were timid and submissive. These kinds
of contrasts and there are lots of them drawn
in genealogy. Morality are essential for understanding what re
resentment is and why it's so important for Nietzsche
on to mom was Nietzsche thinks already well in
place before the slave revolt and r morality. He
even acknowledges in genealogy that the old masters experienced
it as well. He's also, he also insists that
uh resent him. Ma is not determined solely by
one social class. So it's not a reaction uh
whose content consists solely in countering noble values. Renton
is instead a kind of instinctive reaction. He thinks
it's found in every human being and at all
times in history, it occurs as naturally as a
kind of involuntary and largely unalterable set of physiological
and psychological responses to certain kinds of input to
our psychology and its effective qualities. And by that,
I mean, it's phenomenological characters and the various emotions
that it causes. These two are largely involuntary and
unalterable across individuals when prompted by a particular set
of inputs as it's found in the slaves. And
the priests, Renton is the focus of most of
Nietzsche's attention because as found in the slaves and
the priests it reveals something that is familiar to
most of us moderns, the kind of powerlessness and
poverty and ill health, unprotected social standing and the
kinds of suffering they cause together entailed that the
slaves couldn't engage in direct retaliation against insult and
injury without immediate risk of losing either their life
or one of their limbs or whatever social status
they had meager as might have been for them,
direct response to an insult was barred entirely. And
so they had to settle for a kind of
indirect retaliation. They had to compensate for the impossibility
of direct revenge with what Nietzsche calls imaginary revenge.
And that is what's characteristic of re anti. If
you think about resulting as Nietzsche presents it, it
is an entire physio psychological sociological economic complex. It's
a huge cauldron that takes inputs, conjoins those inputs
with pre-existing beliefs, desires, and hopes and spits out
particular kinds of other emotions, other actions and so
forth. And at the root, it's a kind of
revenge. But if you think about the kinds of
revenge that we have to discuss here, it's a
unique kind of revenge. We can, if somebody bumps
us in the subway with their elbow, we will
typically move their arm out of the way. That's
not ri antimo, even if it is a kind
of revenge, it's self protection. Um And we might
even I have some kind of defensive counter blow,
but the desire to cause suffering in others is
not there in regent, the desire to cause suffering
is there. And so resentment recruits other beliefs in
effective states so that we can displace or transfer
our suffering onto another a culprit. And that culprit
is held causally responsible for our suffering. And we
thereby as Nietzsche puts it narcotize or anesthetize our
own suffering, that kind of anesthetizing transference of suffering
on to another person who we hold causally responsible
for our own suffering is typical of rezoning. All
it effectively redirects the sufferer away from the true
reason for pain and on to some other cause
for it once fed into the cauldron of uh
resentment, the inputs mix with all kinds of other
effects, all kinds of other emotions, drives desires, beliefs
about oneself and one others and, and others. It
becomes unlike the masters who resolve their rezoning law
quickly and with violent acts of physical behavior, it
becomes a stew, it continues to churn and it
adds other ingredients all the time. Make that makes
it um ruminative, provocative, poisonous, creative, and imaginative.
So, moving on to another topic and still in
regards to the first essay of the book, what
role does uh Nietzsche's psychology of drives and effects
play in the genealogy of morality?
Uh Ricardo, I'm afraid that I can't really talk
a whole lot about this because this is such
a core part of the genealogy and it's so
poorly discussed in the genealogy. It's, it's a remarkable
facet of the genealogy that he presupposes this complex
drive and affect moral psychology and almost never talks
about it. So at least in the genealogy, but
II, I will say uh a couple of things,
OK. For Nietzsche, the subject, the eye, the ego
is fused with action. A strong person is somebody
whose actions confront difficult conditions directly. A weak person
is someone who acts to avoid challenging conditions or
who quickly capitulates to them or dissembles about them
or dithers about them or procrastinates about them. These
kinds of subjectivity and agency were embodied in the
old masters. They were healthy, they affirmed life, they
were powerful, they were energetic, they were cheerful, they
were spontaneous and they were all of those things
simply because that's how they acted day in and
day out. They rarely reflected on whether they exercise
free will. They've rarely reflected on much of anything
at all. And so they didn't have time or
psychological space for Rizzoni man to take hold. It
wasn't because they were um more complicated psychologically than
anybody else and it exercised free will to overcome
resentment. It was because they didn't care and they
didn't remember insults long enough for those insults to
take hold in their own psychology and demand deferred
retribution. They were direct immediate in her moral psychology.
On the other hand, the subject comes untethered from
its action. And so Nietzsche describes this in uh
essay one section 13 as the indifferent substratum behind
the person who has the freedom to manifest strength
or weakness. And this indifferent substratum is the soul,
the philosophical subject. Assuming that there is a kind
of detached soul that's outfitted with free will to
choose to act in numerous ways, different ways in
every circumstance that the person engages, licenses hurt morality
to direct attention away from actions and towards that
soul, its choices and its intentions. So this gives
herd animals the impression that their weakness is actually
a kind of expression of their strength. They're strong
enough to choose submission to others, to choose to
turn the other cheek, to choose to obey God's
mandates. Nietzsche tries to stamp out every remaining spark
of the pretension. Um THAT any component of our
psychological economy originates from something nonna. He likewise tries
to replace all of these non natural components with
natural psychological components. And that's the basis of his
drive affect psychology. His argument isn't just that natural
drives and affects coexist with other non natal psychological
components like conscious thought, logical and rational abilities or
moral and religious injunctions. Nietzsche's ambition is much stronger.
He tries to understand all of the complexities of
human behavior and psychology by using these two categories,
drives and affects. He also adds memory, sensory perception
and taro exception and conscious thinking. These are either
readily applicable to other organisms or they are developments
for what's already readily applicable to other organisms. So
that's kind of the basis of his drive affect
psychology. It's his best attempt to provide a conceptual
framework for the fundamental entities in the domain of
our psyche. And as a result, it has to
do away with all of the supernatural nonsense and
puffery of philosophy and religion. I think if you
ask me, what is a drive I've argued for
many years and so have others that it's a
kind of long standing, relatively stable and for most
of them subconscious activating or impelling or invert urging,
it's a kind of disposition which if you feed
it certain prompts reliably and regularly tends to result
in certain behaviors of specific kinds that satiate the
props. So that's in, in general, what I think
a drive is, they are internal to us and
they're embodied in us, but not just us. Any
organism that's alive is comprised of drives psychologically as
well. They're dynamically coupled with other sub organ organism
drives and with other sub organism, physiological and psychological
states. Um They're not modular in photo sense. They
don't just turn away at a particular task. They
are closely coupled with all kinds of things inside
us. Since they causally uh couple with other drives
of states and are not modular, they're never encapsulated,
they're never isolated from other drives and affects. And
since we as organisms inhabit a larger environment that's
made up of or other organisms, the sub organismic
drives typically couple with and embed themselves in those
extra organism environments. So the overall picture you get
in Nietzsche is of this unbelievably energetic, incessantly stimulating
highly interactive and ever changing uh psyche not only
between drives within organisms, but also between organisms and
their environment and between organisms and other organisms.
So getting now into the essay number two of
the genealogy of morality. In your book, you presented
as being about the moral psychology of conscience and
uh conscience and guilt. But to pave the way
into talking about conscience and guilt, let me ask
you first, what is the morality of custom and
what are its psychological implications or consequences?
Nietzsche mentions in genealogy but does not really discuss
the importance of customs and the morality of custom
and the psychology of customs. He does discuss these
issues in daybreak. And so when in the book,
I talk about these things, I talk about what
Nietzsche says in Daybreak about customs. He thinks that
in general customs traditions, whether they be economic, cultural
or religious helped to install memory, emotional regulation, attention
control, self awareness and a feeling of obligation to
the community. And these things occurred well before uh
Christianity, these are, these are uh psychological phenomena that
probably go back 4 to 8000 years as these
communities first became to first came to be distilled
out of roving bands of nomads. So thousands of
years before the slave revolt and morality even began
this primitive morality of custom, established a bunch of
conventions that distinguished acceptable behavior from unacceptable behavior, distinguished
it from atypical behavior and captain those who were
subject to it, this constant, he calls it a
perpetual compulsion to practice customs from an embodied embedded
perspective of the mind. This is a particularly interesting
facet of Nietzsche's genealogy because it focuses on the
ritualized behavior of customs and traditions. He claims that
it infiltrated the this practice of custom and tradition
infiltrated education, marriage, farming, war, speech, health care and
the interactions with one another. And the gods. What
is crucial in all of this psychology of custom
and tradition is that customs are fundamentally superfluous stipulations
as he puts it, you are to engage in
this particular kind of physical behavior because we say
so. And because that is the custom fundamentally, the
particular motor behaviors r trivial and uninteresting, but they
become laden with meaning and significance. The frequent rehearsal
of these customs and habits hardened and helped cultivate
memory. They helped to cultivate emotional regulation, they help
to cultivate attention control because we had to focus
endogenously, we had to focus on the custom in
front of us. And so we had to regulate
our emotions long enough to be able to engage
in that endogenous attention control control more than that
customs and traditions co inculcated a sense of obligation
to the larger collective. It was because we engaged
in these customs and traditions that we were members
of this larger collective. Nietzsche is convinced that we
cannot comprehend how inescapable, this compulsory dimension of morality
of custom must have been. And he also thinks
that that's only because we've so internalized it, that
its novelty is no longer salient millennia of later
developments have papered over all of the compulsory dimensions
of a morality of custom. They just become part
of who we are.
And what is the role played by punishment?
Nietzsche has more interesting things to say about punishment
uh than almost any other philosopher. I exempt Foucault
who also has very interesting things to say about
punishment. I will say autobiographically that when I first
read the genealogy of morality, I didn't understand what
he was going on about with punishment. And it
took a long time to understand why he would
focus on punishment except for some sadistic interest in
the practice. But it's quite clear that for him,
punishment is a mechanism for embedding and cultivating memory.
It's as he puts it a technique of Memnon
Xs. He thinks that it is one of the
crucial social psychological mechanisms for cultivating within us, a
sense of synchronic and diachronic identity and for cultivating
within us, the expectation that we will continue into
the future. So long as we have memory of
our past, his fascination with the brutality of punishment
regimes is kind of disturbing. But he thinks that
it has to be this way because we were
when punishment first emerged little more than animals. And
he thinks that the public and private procedures of
punishment eventually burned into our, into our memories. Five
or six thou shall nots and these thou shall
not and thou shells were necessary conditions to enjoy
the advantage of living in a peaceful society. Of
course, he thinks that there are etymological support um
for his way of thinking about punishment. And he
thinks that punishment is allied with um guilt and
deaths and using that etymological evidence. He starts to
crowbar his way into the long history of creditor,
debtor exchange relationships and the punishment that accompanied them.
He thinks this particular socio-economic set of relationships was
the basis of our eventual notion of bad conscience
and guilt. When punishment first appeared, there was no
distinction between the subject and the and its actions.
So the modern thought that we have that we
always punish miscreants to cure them of their wicked
choices already pres presupposes way too much. If you
look back at the practice of punishment. This is
one of the things he's most famous for in
genealogy. You can see that it's overladen with various
functions. But what continues to be the case from
the early part of our human history up until
today is the practice of punishment. Various functions are
laid on top of that practice. But what's universal
and cross temp across time is the practice of
punishment. And so he warns against projecting back to
the origin of punishment. What is for us? Now,
the obvious thought that the criminal deserves to be
punished because he could have acted otherwise. For most
of our history, punishment simply inflicted suffering on a
wrongdoer who caused others injury. Not as we now
think because the wrong doer is morally responsible for
choosing to act intentionally. And here, I think that
you can draw an analogy with um phenotypic expressions
of um of genetic information. There are all kinds
of adaptations, there are all kinds of expectations, There
are all kinds of ma adaptations in that are
discussed in evolutionary theory. What's common across all of
them is the expression of genomic information in a
phenotype that interacts with its environment. And there's no
reason to think that a particular mutation that originally
developed generations ago had at the time of its
origin, the same function that it currently has. Nietzsche
is well aware of this and he's deeply impressed
by it. And so he takes that kind of
conceptual framework and applies it to punishment. The crucial
thing about punishment is that it he thinks it
arose in exchange in commercial relationships, but it's not
the only um place that emerge. But let's talk
just about those. When the, when a debtor didn't
live up to the promise that was established by
some contract with a creditor, the creditor could inflict
all kinds of torture and dishonor on the debtor.
And so he could cut off as much flesh
as seemed appropriate for the dead. This is the
basis of an eye for an eye, tooth, for
tooth and so forth. The logic here is completely
simple. It's undemanding and it's gruesome. There was no
in kind compensation. We didn't repay loan money with
interest. We didn't forfeit our processions, we didn't sacrifice
our labor. Instead, the creditor, the person to whom
the money was owed had the pleasure of having
the right to exercise power over the powerless, the
pleasure to do evil for the pleasure of doing
evil and its this punishment. The equivalence between receiving
a harm and obtaining the license to mistreat that
becomes entrenched in us. And that's because Nietzsche thinks
that it's a psychological truth that to make someone
suffer is pleasure in its highest form. He says
that in uh essay two section six,
but then how do we get to bad conscience
and guilt? And what is the distinction between them?
The bad conscience? Mhm I'm going to assume that
the term bad conscience and the term guilt cofer.
I know there are some Nietzsche scholars who think
that there's a distinction between bad conscience and guilt.
But for um purposes of genealogy, moral morality, I
think we can assume that they are basically co
referential when you Nietzsche asks us. And section 14
of the second essay, I think, to consider the
psychology of the criminal criminals feel the pang of
guilt or bad conscience at best erratically, and Nietzsche
gives four reasons why this is the case. Um
Criminals typically think to themselves. Not that they did
something bad but something unexpected happened. They got caught.
They don't think that they are guilty. They think
that they got caught and there's a certain former
president of the United States who is an example
of this kind of thinking, a this former president
doesn't think that he's guilty of anything. It's just
that he gets caught and he gets caught by
people who are out to get him. Criminals also
have to face the court. And those who judge
wrongdoers typically target their cause of responsibility for harm
caused and try to find measures that will block
the criminal from causing more of it. The courts
rarely remain focused for very long on whether the
convict feels guilty. Third judged and sentenced convicts typically
feel not guilt but sadness. They don't think that
they ought not to have done what they did.
They typically think, oh, I got caught and I'll
submit to the punishment in the same way that
I'll submit to an illness. I'll be brave and
I'll be fatalistic. And fourth prison life itself does
virtually nothing to cultivate the pang of gu of
guilt and converts. So if you strip away all
of the misperceptions about guilt and bad conscience, what
remains nevertheless is the durability of the methods and
procedures of punishment, its causal consequences, its effects. And
Nietzsche thinks that punishment achieves more than anything else.
A lengthening of memory. It results in a will
to be more cautious to be less trusting, to
go about things circumspectly, any increase in fear, the
intensification of intelligence, the mastering of desires, we then
add the notions of predictability, attention control, promise, making
emotional regulation that are already in place from the
morality of custom. And what we're describing are the
psychological prerequisites for prudential agency. Prudential agency or responsibility
is that entire suite of psychological capacities that were
cultivated in human animals by custom, by the c
by the credit or debtor relationship and by punishment,
a prudential agent is a human animal who is
prudentially responsible and the incarceration mechanisms for creating this
potentially responsible person. Those mechanisms are primarily the morality
of custom, the set of credit or debtor relationships
and punishment that allows us to introduce the notion
of conscience and from conscience, we can then introduce
the notion of bad conscience or guilt. I think
for Nietzsche conscience is being reflectively conscious of our
prerogative of responsibility and promise making. It's being reflectively
conscious of our power over ourselves, of being answerable,
accountable to ourselves and to others in short of
being an agent. Nevertheless, being reflectively aware of our
prudential responsibility is not the same as bad conscience.
Bad conscience is the reflective awareness of guilt and
the accompanying qualitative effect of suffering of feeling guilty.
This is a relatively late flowering phenomenon. So when
his primitive progenitors first appear these ances, the ancestral
feelings of its primitive pro progenitor guilt isn't bad
conscience, isn't he? He isn't even present. The question
is for essay two, how this primitive ancestral feeling,
a prudential responsibility grew with the various new interpretations
into bad conscience or guilt. And this is a
monstrously complicated undertaking. In essay two, Nietzsche initially assumes
a couple of things. The origin of the ancestral
affect. A bad conscience occurred abruptly. It didn't even
cause raison in the domesticated populations where it was
first, ah, found. The second assumption is that incarceration
began with violence. Nietzsche says in uh essay two
section 17, that the first organized societies quote emerged
as a terrible tyranny, a repressive and ruthless machinery
and continued working until the raw material of people
and semi animals had been not just needed and
made compliant but shaped in this process, which he
thinks was violent and rapid. Some group of masters
laid its hands on a wildly unruly group of
semi, semi animals and through custom and through punishment,
shaped them, shifted them, created a structure for them.
Since they imposed order on the herd, these old
masters were necessary for the emergence of bad conscience
without them. Uh Bad conscience and guilt would never
have been possible. But the first individuals to experience
the effects that were ancestral to bad conscience were
the herd, those on whom order was imposed. And
this is one of the more mysterious passages of
um the genealogy it occurs in section 17. He
says, when the masters impose form and order on
the herd, violent oppression was unavoidable and therefore they
made or forcibly made Leighton most of the herds
freedoms, they eliminated them or they made them latent.
And Nietzsche says that there's a re remaining distillate
of freedom, which he calls the instinct of freedom
that was forcibly made latent by the masters turning
semi animals into humans. And this instinct for freedom
of freedom, repressed and incarcerated within the self, a
whole set of violent and out typically outwardly directed
emotions inward. So that with the external expression of
the will to power thwarted by these imposed mechanisms
of culture. These humans in the early societies had
no option but to turn inwards on themselves. This
is his so-called internalization of man. And when that
happened, humans started the job of self formation. This
Nietzsche calls active bad conscience. And he thinks that
the act of bad conscious, this activity of self
formation form, imposing labor on the self to make
ourselves prudential agents is the womb of every ideal
and imaginative event. And that it is brought a
quote. He he puts it this way in 18,
a wealth of novel, disconcerting beauty and affirmation to
light. And for the first time, perhaps beauty itself,
he then says it's only bad conscience only the
will to self violation that provides the precondition for
the value of the un egoistic. So that even
if bad conscience is a sickness, it's a sickness
like pregnancy. So here the bad conscience is this
inward turning, internalization of outwardly direct, previously, outwardly directed,
uh violent or oppressive uh emotions and desires turn
back against oneself. And it is responsible Nietzsche thinks
for what makes us so great. Now, that kind
of act of bad conscience is unfortunately not the
only form of bad conscience. He also introduces the
other form of bad consciousness, not bad conscience. And
that's the one that's inculcated by religion. Hey Ricardo.
Yeah, te tell us then about uh religious uh
guilt. I mean that religious bit that you were
mentioning there before we move on to perhaps uh
essay number three,
religious guilt developed already in pre Cristian societies. And
if you think about the difference between our kind
of society, uh Let me rephrase if you think
about the difference between these pre Christian societies that
were influenced by monotheism and the Greeks, you can
start to tease apart some of the differences that
were responsible for the developing religious guilt in Greek
societies. Um The problem for people was that we
simply didn't know enough to know how to avoid
getting into trouble. Our foolishness uh resulted in that
most of us just stumbled around in a kind
of uninformed stupor and we constantly bumped into other
idiots like ourselves. These pileups where we crashed into
one another and cause each other harm were not
a reason for thinking that humanity was morally reprehensible
or responsible for choosing to be ignorant since the
gods, the Greek gods, they were always there. And
as since they were always there, any inward attempt
to ground suffering and being guilty could be short
circuited when the Greeks reflected and looked inside to
discover why they were so miserable. They didn't find
that they were responsible for it, what they found
or the consequences of God's trickery or their delight
in our human suffering. These gods were never inside
us. They were external beings. And so looking inside
themselves never revealed to the Greeks that they were
causally responsible for their suffering. The Christian God is
very different. The Christian God added certain innovations to
the God blueprint that was already found in Judaism.
The first innovation for the Christian God was that
it was maximal. It is still the greatest feeling
indebtedness of indebtedness on earth. Nietzsche asks us to
remember that Christianity inherited its God from Judaism. And
so we inherited the Jewish sense of religious indebtedness
to God for flourishing as a society. Judaism was
novel itself. It refocused a set of dispersed debts
to a pantheon of gods onto a single God,
a single point making their God the only God
to whom we owe all debts. So for Judaism,
God was kind of a solar furnace that refocused
all of our debts onto a single point. And
this maximal feeling of indebtedness is religious guilt, religious
guilts expression is still not moral guilt. And this
is where Christianity went beyond Judaism so long as
bad conscience or guilt remained tied to our indebtedness
to God. He was still about an external entity,
even if it was the case as with Judaism,
that God is the maximal creditor, but moral guilt
concerns the self. And so we still need other
elements to explain how this externally directed religious guilt
became internally directed moral guilt. And Nietzsche's explanation of
this in essay two section 21 is um not
particularly clear. I think the best that I can
say about it is this.
So essay number three then is about the meaning
of the aesthetic ideal and its spread through European
society. Could you start by telling us what the
aesthetic ideal is for Nietzsche?
Mhm It's a set of values, moral values and
Nietzsche identifies them as compassion, self denial, self sacrifice,
poverty, humility and chastity. He sometimes in other works,
I um add selflessness and self renunciation. But it's
this, it's this set of values that are typically
associated with morality and acting in an un egoistic
way.
And does it relate in any way to the
slave revolt we talked about earlier?
Right? An answer to this question has uh basically
two elements. The first element is that um the
old Aristocrats and warriors were convinced of their superiority
and they were pleased with their happy lives and
they lived in this kind of bubble that Nietzsche
calls the pathos of distance. They had every reason
there was to isolate themselves from the herd. The
herd was four. They were lazy, they were dirty,
they were impure, they were resentful, they were conniving,
they lied. And so the, the aristocrats, the masters,
the old masters try to relinquish the task of
mingling with the herd to somebody else. And they
were delighted when the priests accepted the job for
when the priests were in charge of the herd.
The old aristocrats and warriors could continue to ignore
them. They were predisposed to do so anyway. And
they f they found a functionary who was willing
to deal with them. But the priests made the
old masters pay for taking on the disagreeable job
of looking after the herd. The priests themselves were
interested in augmenting their social power with respect to
the aristocrats and the warriors. And so they took
what they had learned about the creative possibilities of
rezoning ma and turn it against the old masters.
In the process. They sowed discontent within the old
masters and they made them feel ashamed about living
happily. They made them feel ashamed of living without
bad conscience. They convinced them, the priests convinced the
old masters that otherworldly powers were even greater than
their earthly power. And so the priests adopted all
kinds of camouflaging tactics to undermine the old masters.
And one of those tactics was to talk about
the ascetic ideals and the way those uh the
the aesthetic values and the ways in which those
ex aesthetic values were preferable to the values that
the old masters themselves lived by. But to be
cons successful against the old masters, the priest had
to convince them that their social standing, their happiness,
their pathos of distance were all unjustified. They had
to convince the masters that they were no different
than the herd and they had to convince the
masters that they suffered, not because they had to
endure the herd or because they had to endure
insults, but because they too were subjects of bad
conscience and guilt. Now, this was true of some
of the priests and clergy before Christianity. But Christianity
really excelled at this project. The Christian priest was
much cleverer than the old masters and was capable
of levels of dialectical finesse that completely threw the
masters. Moreover, uh the priest, the Christian priest carried
all of these ingenious doctrines around with him in
a sack and these ingenious doctrines, the immaterial soul
that God gave to each of us, a free
will that was equally distributed to each of us,
the promise of power and happiness that the old
masters never dreamed of achieving kind of everlasting life
in heaven, focusing on gratitude into a single God
who had sacrificed himself for all of us left
us saddled with original sin. All of these doctrines
started to breed shame within the old masters. So
the priest, the Christian priest took his greater cleverness,
his mastery of dialectic and his collection of religious
doctrines and seduced the poor, less reflective old masters
into feeling guilty about themselves and to doubt their
right to happiness and then infected the old masters
with the doctrines of the aesthetic values, the ascetic
ideal to complete the job of making them ashamed
of themselves.
But does Nietzsche also see positive aspects to aesthetic
values
undeniably? He does. Um I think it's important for
us to recognize that he thinks that there are
both negative and positive aspects uh to aesthetic values.
And he catalogs the real dangers of ascetic values.
In section 17 through uh 21 of the third
essay. The first negative a aspect. The danger is
that aesthetic values narcotize our emotions. But they do
so in an attempt to thwart depression, he talks
about this in section 17, for example, second, um
the ascetic values advocate mechanical activities and tiny pleasures
as methods for alleviating depression. Third, and this is
a more dangerous danger. They addict the sufferer to
the priest's diagnosis of sin and guilt, bad conscience
and to the priest's cure for them. And they
thus ensure an ongoing dependency on religion. Fourth, they
introduce a protocol that not only doesn't ease the
suffering but adds suffering to suffering. Thus, compounding rather
than abating suffering. Fifth, the ascetic ideals emphasis on
sin and guilt and bad conscience. In n the
sufferers to the priests feeling orgies, the priest loves
to talk about our feelings and it thus desensitizes
the sufferer to the pleasures of living and it
habituates them to hating what life actually has to
offer. And finally, the ascetic ideals try to stipulate
that religions that embody them should be spread as
far and wide as possible. And this corrupts not
just others who suffer but even the healthy. No,
Nietzsche spends a lot of time in section 16
through 21 talking about these negative facets of the
aesthetic ideals. In fact, uh essay three section 17
is the longest single section in the book. And
it's the section uh where he talks about narcotizing
emotions and the role of ascetic ideals and narcotizing
emotions. But having said that and having cataloged all
of these negative facets of uh of the aesthetic
values, he also allows that they have some positive
effects uh a aspects as well. And this will
lead us eventually into a discussion of nihilism. But
the point here is this ascetic values fixate on
and celebrate failure, decay, this fortune deprivation, destruction of
the self, self flagellation and self sacrifice. But since
everything has to be measured in terms of its
value for life, the ascetic ideal must also be
a trick for the Preser preservation of life. But
it's the preservation for a particular kind of life.
And that's what Nietzsche is most interested in. In
this third essay, the people who are safeguarded by
endorsing the ascetic ideal already live futile or decaying
lives. And they use the ascetic ideal to justify
and preserve themselves and protect against further decline, their
miseries. The way they live is second only to
their heartbeat. And so they clutch the ascetic ideal
as a last hope as a way to continue
to live and avoid uh nihilistic suicide. The ascetic
priests who offered these ideals to the herd provide
them with a diagnosis of their suffering, a prognosis
for its future course, if it's left untreated and
a prescription regimen to treat their suffering. Now, Nietzsche
thinks that all of this is gobbledygook and complete
nonsense. But nevertheless, historically, it has proven to be
remarkably effective in helping those of us who are
not lucky to continue to live. It provides meaning
for our, the aesthetic values provide meaning for our
suffering and it's therefore the great consoling function of
the ascetic ideal. Until this point in history, Nietzsche
thinks that the ascetic ideal has been the only
interpretation and meaning of deep suffering. But it's been
enough because any meaning is better than no meaning
and with its explanation and justification of suffering in
hand, most of humanity could continue to live without
collapsing into despair.
Uh But of course, we tend to associate the
ascetic ideal with uh priests, religious people. But according
to Nietzsche, please correct me if I'm wrong. But
according to him, uh we can also find ascetic
values in people like artists, philosophers and even scientists
correct
you all
all true. Um I'll simply say a couple of
quick things about the way artists and philosophers use
aesthetic values. Artists and philosophers can use ascetic values
as a kind of strategy to isolate themselves from
um those emotional commitments, those psychological commitments that deter
them from their great projects. So philosophers in particular,
um philosophers in particular try to claim that they
are beyond the call of um binary. They are
beyond the concerns of making a positive impression on
others. They are beyond emotional relationships with others. They
are beyond the need for social relationships of many
kinds. But these are used strategically so that they
can live with their beloved ideas. Their ideas are
where they have their social interactions. They observe their
ideas, they follow their ideas, they capture, they inspect
their ideas, they analyze their ideas, they distill their
ideas, they test their ideas, they research ideas, they
organize their ideas. All of this requires a kind
of monastic life and the aesthetic values are used
to encourage the conditions necessary for the production of
their, of their uh of their great ideas. Having
said that um artists too can do this but
not all artists do this. And he's particularly critical
of Wagner who thinks that chastity became antithetical to
sensuality. And Nietzsche has nothing but contempt at this
point in his career for Wagner's as a AAA
affirmation of aesthetic values because he thinks that chastity
and sensuality don't have to be contradictory. And then
even if they were, that's what makes life interesting.
So as Wagner's are continued and deepened into his
old age, it became increasingly ascetic and sickly. And
he has an analysis of Parsifal as a Christian
exercise in asceticism. And he hopes that a Wagner
was intending it as a joke, but he fears
that he wasn't so bracketing these strategic uses of
the ascetic ideals, we have to return to the
moral use of asceticism. And here religious types, philosophical
types and moral types are all to blame for
advocating the universal applicability of aesthetic values to everybody.
And that includes the scientists. In the latter part
of the third essay, Nietzsche criticizes the scientists and
science is a practice for continuing to inhabit the
vapors of asceticism. Even though um by the time
he was writing, science was already posing a danger
to religion. Nietzsche thinks that most of the scientists
that he read was doing nothing more than being
a rabble rouser. And even if he admits the
scholars and scientists can be worthy and can be
busy and take pleasure in their craft, he thinks
that nevertheless, there's this contempt for the self in
science, a kind of bad conscience and he identifies
the root of the problem here as not being
liberated from the ascetic ideal. And he thinks they're
not being liberated from the ascetic ideal because scientists
still believe in truth. This is one of his
most outrageous claims, but it's also an interesting one.
And so when he says in essay 24 that
the science that science's laser focus on the factum
brut its renunciation of any interpretation, those things together
express the asceticism of virtue just as well as
any denial of sensuality. Now, that sentence condenses an
entire argument, Nietzsche's convinced that there's only perspective of
sensory experience. Nietzsche is convinced that there's only perspective
of knowledge. Nietzsche's convinced that there's only perspective of
concepts. But here is where his argument gets interesting.
Science and scholarship in general think that they rely
on and are warranted by observation and measurement. But
both of these are sensory experiences. So both the
concepts of science and scholarship use and the discoveries
they make rely on and are warranted by perspective
of perceptual experience. So scientific and scholarly concepts and
scientific and scholarly logic, uh knowledge are perspective of
themselves. They cannot deliver perspective free facts, but science's
brute facts are supposed to be perspective free. And
since that's the case, neither empirical science nor scholarship
discover facts and assuming that perspective can be substituted
for interpretation, we can directly infer that to the
extent that science and scholarship think they discover brute
facts rather than interpretations rather than perspectives to that
extent. Do they mimic and reiterate asceticism's mistake of
mistrusting sensory experience? That's the best argument that I
can distill out of this outrageous claim that there
is no truth or that they still believe in
truth. So this is not, II, I, I'd like
to add one thing here. This is not to
say the truth is worthless. Truth is a, a
much truth is a significant advance over other objects
of faith. Um Because it's pursuit eventually leads us
to questioning what it is and investigating whether it
has the value it has heretofore been assumed to
have. So Nietzsche does not infer from the perspective
of science that it's no better than religion or
other perspectives. It's certainly better. Um Its methods of
knowledge acquisition are mentally much more hygienic than the
polluted wells of religious superstition and warrants confronting uh
religion and philosophy directly, close observation, hypothesis formation and
testing empirical support, disc conformation, rigorous analysis. He thinks
all of these things are crucial, but we still
need to understand that the faith in truth is
something that itself has to be questioned and that
was going to be part of his big project
that he never completed.
So uh I know that we are reaching our
time limit. So let me just ask you perhaps
a couple of questions, general questions about the genealogy
of morality. So after all of what we talked
about, what would you say are the main merits
of this book.
The book is so widespread, has such a broad
scope, digs into so many different details, is so
creative, so imaginative, so alive with the love of
thinking that it is in my considered opinion, impossible
to identify the main contributions of the book. It
is a work of great genius and philosophers who
think about the genealogy of morality are confronted by
somebody whos thinking is demonstrably more imaginative, demonstrably more
penetrating demonstratively, more um probing and comprehensive and profound
than any of us are likely ever to achieve.
Having said all of that, I think his analysis
of Renton is still not fully understood or appreciated
its role in moral psychology, I think is still
not fully appreciated. Nietzsche's um analysis of the internalization
of humanity, I think is something that we still
don't understand completely. We don't know whether it's even
accurate, we don't know. And I think that his
analysis of asceticism and his analysis of nihilism are
still among the most profound things that Nietzsche wrote
and things that we are living through today. Nietzsche
anticipated an enormous amount of what's happened since his
time. We who are in his wake, try sometimes
to demonstrate that he continues to be relevant by
trying to capture his thought within conceptual frameworks that
were familiar with. But he never even heard of.
We do this as a way of honoring his
greatness and genius, but it minimizes him. It lessens
him the main merit of genealogy if there is
a single main merit is that it is a
document that exhibits a mind on fire and a
mind that was so full of so many different
kinds of knowledge that it, that it really struggled
to capture everything that was in that mind. And
it didn't it? And there are, there are plenty
of reasons why genealogy is uh not a successful
book, but it's, it's a success. It's a success
in so many ways that we don't typically acknowledge
um that we have to recognize that these other
ways of success trump its failures and its shortcomings.
And, and so my last question will be exactly
about that. What would you say are perhaps its
main gaps and shortcomings?
Well, the obvious one is that he wrote this
in 1887. And uh I'm sorry, you, you wrote
it in uh 1887 1888. And he, he, he
published it in November of 1888 and then started
his big project of the revaluation of morality, the
revaluation of values. He only made headway for about
seven months by October of 1888. He was, I
think aware that he was never going to complete
the revaluation of value project. And so the defense
of these categories that make appearances in genealogy of
morality are never adequately defended. And chief among those
is his notion of power. Nietzsche mentions power in
the genealogy of morality four or five times it
that those mentions demonstrate that he was on his
way to an analysis of power in the revaluation
project. And that, that analysis would be used as
the Fulcrum around which is critique of moral values
that he analyzes the development of in genealogy would
be focused. But he never got there. Um And
that's the single greatest, uh it's not a shortcoming
of genealogy of morality because it was intended as
a kind of preliminary, a preliminary um statement that
was appropriate to the revaluation of values critical project.
But he presupposes in genealogy the results of that
revaluation project and he doesn't adequately defend them in
the book. And so that's one of the shortcomings
of the book. Another shortcoming of the book is
that at times it gets a little histrionic and,
you know, that's a, that's a problem with Nietzsche
um throughout his period from beyond good and evil
forward. Um But I don't find that much of
a problem. Um It, it's a problem, especially towards
the end of essay three. He moves at such
a fast rate that it's really difficult to understand
the logical structure of the arguments that are contained
in that in those last four or five sections.
So the book is again, niches on the genealogy
of morality, a guide. I'm leaving a link to
it in the description of the interview. And doctor
w and apart from the book, uh are there
any places on the internet where people can find
your work?
Uh No, I'm not much of a self publicize,
so I don't have a web page. Um I
have, you know, I have a number of articles,
books about Nietzsche published over the years. I also
work in uh the philosophy of Consciousness and I'm
particularly interested at this point in the emergence of
reflective consciousness in the uh paleolithic period and the
role of language in that emergence of con reflective
consciousness. Picking up on a Nietzschean theme, by the
way, you know, the consciousness is a function of
language. Mhm
mhm So thank you so much then for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a real pleasure to talk with you.
Well, thank you very much for having me. It's
been a, it's been a privilege to talk with
you. Thank you very much.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno Bernard Seche, O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew
Whitten. B are no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ
Conners, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine
in NAI Z Mark Nevs calling Hol Brookfield, Governor
Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and
H her meal and Lain Jung Y and the
K Hes Mark Smith J Tom Hummel s friends,
David Sloan Wilson, Yaar, ro ro Diego, Jan Punter
Romani Charlotte Bli Nico Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo, Stassi
Nale medicine, Gary G Alman Sam of Zed YPJ
Barboza, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry
Franca, Beto Lati Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary FTD
and W Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke
Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo David
Williams Di A Costa, Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey Junior,
Old Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur by Robert
Grassy Zorn. Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick, Mark
Kempel Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson,
Benjamin Gilbert Jessica No Week, Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson,
Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perras Kate
Von Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali
Mohammadi. Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David
Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net.
A special thanks to my producers is our web,
Jim Frank Luca Toni, Tom Vig and Bernard N
Cortes Dixon Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, John Carlman Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden.
And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian
Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for all.